Hi friends
In this video we're going to learn about the for
Loop.
Loops are used to repeatedly execute a block of statements and for
loop is an important one and it is used when we
know the exact number of iterations
For example if you want to print good morning five
times the number of iterations is known which is five
And if you want to print the numbers from 1 to 100
here also we know the number of iterations
It is 100
So in such cases we can use for loop
Now this is the syntax of for loop we have
the initialisation, condition and increment or decrement and then
we have the statements to be executed and there are
these semicolons which separate the initialisation, condition and
increment/decrement
Now let us see the working of for loop The
working is very simple
First step is initialisation and it will only happen
once and then the condition will be checked
And if it is true the statement inside will be
executed and then it will increment/decrement
And thus the first iteration is completed
Now for the second iteration it will check the condition
If it is true again it will execute the statements
inside and increment /decrement after that and the
second iteration is also completed
Now for the next iteration it checks the condition again
and suppose it failed
Now the control comes out of the loop. so it repeats
until the condition is failed
Now see this example programme to print Good morning five
times
So we have the main function and inside we declare
integer Variable i and then we have the for loop
and we initialise i equal to 1
And since we need to print five times we can
set the condition as i less than = 5
and then the increment part i++
So in the first iteration initialisation happens and i equal
to one Now then we check the conditions
One is less than or equal to five
So condition is true
So it executes the statements inside which is print Good
morning
So it will be printed and then it will perform
the increment operation
So i becomes 2
So first iteration is thus completed Now in the second
iteration we won't be initialising again but we directly check
the condition and i which is 2 is less than
or equal to five so condition is true and we
execute the print statement
So good morning is printed again and after that
i is incremented  and it becomes 3
Now second iteration is also completed
Now condition is checked again and 3 is less than
So the condition is true
So it goes inside and prints good morning again
And now i will be incremented and it becomes 4
and third iteration is also completed
Now it checks the condition again and 4less than 5
So it goes inside and prints Good morning
And after that the increment operation will be done and
i becomes five
Now fourth iteration is also completed
Now the condition needs to be checked again and
5=5
So condition is true
So it goes inside and prints
Good morning and increments i. So i become 6. now
fifth iteration is also completed and the condition is checked
again now i=6 which is neither less than
five nor equal to five
So the condition failed and the control comes out of
the for loop and the programme is completed now
So that is how the for loop works
Now see another example
Programme to print five numbers from 5 to 1 in
descending order
So we have the main function and we declare i
and then we have the for loop and we have
for (i=5; i greater than or equal to 1; i--)
So first initialisation happens and i=5 now
Now it checks the condition five is greater than one
so the condition is true
Hence it executes the statements inside which is to print
the value of i and i equal to five
So 5 is printed and now i will be decremented
So it becomes 4. so The first iteration is thus
completed and now it checks the condition again and
4>1
So the condition is true
So it prints the value of i which is 4
And after that  i is decremented and becomes 3
Now second iteration is completed and now it checks the
condition again
And 3 is greater than one
So the condition is true
So it prints the value of i which is 3
and then it is decremented and becomes 2
Now third iteration is also completed and again it checks
the condition and 2 greater than 1
So it is true
So it prints the value of i which is 2
And after that  i is decremented and it becomes 1
Now the fourth iteration is also completed and it checks
the condition again and 1=1
So the condition is again true
So it prints the value of i which is 1
And after that i is decremented and it becomes 0
So fifth iteration is also completed
And again when it checks the condition, zero is neither
greater than nor equal to one
So condition failed and control comes out of the for loop
And thus the execution is completed
So that's all and thank you for watching this video